Curation workflow (#107)
IDR/idr.openmicroscopy.org: _includes/curation-workflow.md

few cells, or images out of focus.

In the processed file they have first given statistics that they have
measured over the 4 replicate wells for each siRNA e.g. “Median
Deviation Fraction - Shorter Prophase” and then again for each siRNA
they say how many replicates are above a certain cut off for this Median
Deviation Fraction score e.g. 2/2 or 2/4. There are results for 2 siRNAs
targetting each gene. Then they have assigned phenotypes at the GENE
level. If half of more of the siRNA replicates that passed QC had a
score above the cut off then they get assigned a “longer prophase” or
“shorter prophase’ phenotype. This is how a gene can end up with both
a longer and shorter prophase phenotype.

To try and show these different levels of results we try to record what
the result in each column of the processed file relates to in the study
file in the ‘processed data file’ section. This bit is hard work to
understand and fill in and we might want to not bother with this in the
future. I think it is still useful to record what object (siRNA, gene,
compound etc) the phenotype is annotated at though.

idr0002-screenA-processed.txt

![](img/curation-workflow/image9.png)

(see

> [<span class="underline">https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/blob/master/idr0002-heriche-condensation/screenA/idr0002-screenA-processed.txt</span>](https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/blob/master/idr0002-heriche-condensation/screenA/idr0002-screenA-processed.txt)

Author: ```suggestion
https://github.com/IDR/idr0002-heriche-condensation/blob/master/screenA/idr0002-screenA-processed.txt)
```

e.g.

\- group:

namespace: openmicroscopy.org/mapr/organism

All the others are just listed but not under a mapr group (usually we
list them first) and they appear in the ‘Others’ group in the Attributes
section in the IDR.

Look at previous bulkmap config files to see what the client names
should be.

If you want to add an external link for the value in another database
add an extra line

\- name: Gene Identifier

clientname: Gene Identifier URL

clientvalue: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/{{ value|urlencode }}

include: yes

Note that if you put a different URL for the same thing e.g. the same
gene identifier, in two different studies you’ll end up with two
different map annotations so you need to be careful about what has been
used previously by checking through other bulkmap-config files.

#### prodNN\_idr00XX\_input\_bulk.txt and prodNN\_idr00XX\_input.txt

So that we can record what was annotated, and what was re-annotated in
each release and to speed up the process of applying all the changes in
idr-next Ola developed a method for adding bulk annotation files and the
bulk-map annotation code using input files and shell scripts.

> The shell scripts themselves live in
> [<span class="underline">https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/tree/master/scripts/reannotate</span>](https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/tree/master/scripts/reannotate).

Author: ```suggestion
```

   deciding which datasets are ‘reference’ or not and are being
   guided by EuroBioimaging on the definition (search for ‘reference’
   within the [Eurobioimaging-Elixir Image
   Data Strategy
   document](http://www.eurobioimaging.eu/sites/default/files/Euro-BioImaging_Elixir_Image_Data_Strategy_0.pdf)
   but we aim to publish datasets that have value beyond simply
   supporting an original publication. Criteria we use (this is on
   our [submission help
   page](http://idr.openmicroscopy.org/about/submission.html))
   are:

  - Datasets **associated** with an existing or upcoming publication

  - **Complete** datasets - not just images supporting one figure in
   the publication

  - Datasets whose metadata can be **integrated** with other datasets
   via identifiers from well-known biomolecular resources (Ensembl,
   NCBI Entrez Gene, RefSeq, PubChem, ChEBI etc)

  - Datasets generated using new imaging **methods** or new analysis
   methods

  - Datasets that are likely to be **re-analysed or incorporated**
   into other studies or integrated with other imaging datasets

Use the `Response to initial enquiry` template to try and find out more.

> The response can be discussed at the Monday IDR meetings to decide whether we want to include the dataset or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response can be discussed at the weekly IDR meetings to decide whether we want to include the dataset or not.
```

Overnight, the data will be linked into place and available on `idr-testing` and `idr-next` servers
under `/uod/idr/filesets/`.

If you need to add other files e.g. from a hard-disk or local copy, you can use rsync to add them
to the ftp server first, then copy to EBI as above.
If this is not feasible, for example due to the size of the data, you can copy the data to a subdirectory of `idr0-slot3:/uod/idr/filesets/` and use the `/uod/idr/filesets/idrftp-aspera.sh` script to copy data to EBI.

For example, to rsync a local file into the ftp server in a suitable location:

`$ rsync -rvP --progress image.ome.tiff idr-ftp.openmicroscopy.org:/data/idrftp-incoming/idr0085-walsh-mfhrem/20200703-ometiff/`

If you need to copy a file from the ftp server to your current local location:

`$ rsync -rvP --progress idr-ftp.openmicroscopy.org:/data/idrftp-incoming/idr0085-walsh-mfhrem/20200703-ometiff/image.ome.tiff .`

See the **Advanced** section below for other data migration workflows.

In the unlikely event that you need direct access to the data at EBI you
need an account there.

**Create directory for notes files, paper drafts, temporary files etc.**

> I usually create another directory to store notes I make about a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually,  another directory is created to store notes made about a
```

![](img/curation-workflow/image8.png)

Each row in the files gives information about the sample, treatment,
channels etc associated with one image.

There are similarities between both library and assay files; both give
information about the samples (i.e. cells), the treatments done to those
samples and things like the channel information. The assay files are
much more like the MAGE-TAB and ISA-TAB methods of describing assays.
The library files are like a cut down version of this to avoid repeating
some information on every row (e.g. we don’t list the source name and
protocols on every line) since the files can be very big (\> 190,000
lines in the case of idr0013-screenA) even without doing this.

#### Library files in more detail 

For library files we start at the point of plates and wells. We don’t
worry about fields. Most submitters are able to provide a file with at
least plates as sheets in Excel files and then a list of wells.

For well number I always convert to A1, A2, A3 etc because this is how
it was in the first screens I did but I suspect its ok to keep them as
A01, A02, A03 etc if that is how they are in the files you receive.

> I usually add a ‘well number’ for nice sorting by Plate then Well Number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ‘well number’ is usually added for nice sorting by Plate then Well Number
```

useful to have for reproducibility. Really we would like to know both
the build of the reference sequence AND the gene annotation build (i.e.
the release of gene information against that reference sequence). E.g.
in idr0013-screenA we have

![](img/curation-workflow/image13.png)

Ifyou (as a curator) add some missing information then note it somewhere
e.g. if a few Gene Symbols are missing then you might add them as IDR
users probably search by these but add a note in the Gene Annotation
Comments e.g. idr0009-screenA

![](img/curation-workflow/image16.png)

Examples of “treatment” columns other than siRNA identifiers and Genes

idr0016-screenA - chemical compounds

![](img/curation-workflow/image20.png)

Always have a Compound Name column and a Dose column if you can. Spell
out the unit e.g. micromolar in full. Include the InChiKey if you can.

There might be more than one “treatment” e.g. idr0025 the cells were
treated with an siRNA and were staining using an antibody against a
protein. The gene related to the localized protein was also included in
the library file.

![](img/curation-workflow/image21.png)

If the treatments are outside of what can be considered a ‘library’ of

> reagents then I usually put them in the column heading of Experimental

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reagents then they are usually put in the column heading of Experimental
```

few cells, or images out of focus.

In the processed file they have first given statistics that they have
measured over the 4 replicate wells for each siRNA e.g. “Median
Deviation Fraction - Shorter Prophase” and then again for each siRNA
they say how many replicates are above a certain cut off for this Median
Deviation Fraction score e.g. 2/2 or 2/4. There are results for 2 siRNAs
targetting each gene. Then they have assigned phenotypes at the GENE
level. If half of more of the siRNA replicates that passed QC had a
score above the cut off then they get assigned a “longer prophase” or
“shorter prophase’ phenotype. This is how a gene can end up with both
a longer and shorter prophase phenotype.

To try and show these different levels of results we try to record what
the result in each column of the processed file relates to in the study
file in the ‘processed data file’ section. This bit is hard work to
understand and fill in and we might want to not bother with this in the
future. I think it is still useful to record what object (siRNA, gene,
compound etc) the phenotype is annotated at though.

idr0002-screenA-processed.txt

![](img/curation-workflow/image9.png)

(see

> [<span class="underline">https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/blob/master/idr0002-heriche-condensation/screenA/idr0002-screenA-processed.txt</span>](https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/blob/master/idr0002-heriche-condensation/screenA/idr0002-screenA-processed.txt)

Reviewer: this link is 404 for me

    > idea\!)

7.  > Add any values and phenotypes from the processed data file.

8.  > If there are phenotype add columns for their mapping to ontologies
    > (e.g. see idr0018)

##### Checking the .txt and .csv files

We don’t really do validation of the study, library/assay, processed and
annotation files yet but I do run a few checks on them.

IDR/idr-metadata/scripts/check\_tab\_columns.pl - checks that each row
has the same number of columns and for trailing spaces at the end of
column values. It will remove the trailing spaces if you select that
option. Use -h to see the options. I started doing this as we found some
cases where Gene Symbols had been submitted with trailing spaces and
mapr counts them as different to Gene Symbols without the trailing
space.

IDR/idr-metadata/scripts/check\_csv\_columns.pl - does the same thing
for the annotation.csv file but will not fix trailing spaces as these
should be fixed in the files used to create the annotation.csv.

IDR/idr-metadata/scripts/check\_utf8.py - checks whether a file contains
valid UTF-8. Often the study file doesn’t with characters like degrees
(º), pi (π), mu (µ) and beta (ß) in the protocols causing problems.

> This is not the best way to do it, but I usually just replace them with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is not the best way to do it, but they are usually just replaced with
```

e.g.

\- group:

namespace: openmicroscopy.org/mapr/organism

All the others are just listed but not under a mapr group (usually we
list them first) and they appear in the ‘Others’ group in the Attributes
section in the IDR.

Look at previous bulkmap config files to see what the client names
should be.

If you want to add an external link for the value in another database
add an extra line

\- name: Gene Identifier

clientname: Gene Identifier URL

clientvalue: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/{{ value|urlencode }}

include: yes

Note that if you put a different URL for the same thing e.g. the same
gene identifier, in two different studies you’ll end up with two
different map annotations so you need to be careful about what has been
used previously by checking through other bulkmap-config files.

#### prodNN\_idr00XX\_input\_bulk.txt and prodNN\_idr00XX\_input.txt

So that we can record what was annotated, and what was re-annotated in
each release and to speed up the process of applying all the changes in
idr-next Ola developed a method for adding bulk annotation files and the
bulk-map annotation code using input files and shell scripts.

The shell scripts themselves live in

> [<span class="underline">https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/tree/master/scripts/reannotate</span>](https://github.com/IDR/idr-metadata/tree/master/scripts/reannotate).

Reviewer: Link is 404ing

Author: This is an old script and the instructions are out of date. I'll remove this paragraph

Project:301
idr0026-weigelin-immunotherapy/experimentA/idr0026-experimentA

The last two Screen:1851 and Project:301 convert all the bulk
annotations into map annotations according to whatever is in
bulkmap-config.yml.

The other ones affect particular mapr groups. E.g. for Screen:1751 we
are moving some annotations from the ‘other’ category
(==bulk\_annotations group) to the ‘orf/supplementary’ group. We have
created a new version of the bulkmap-config file with some annotations
moved from being in no mapr category to the new ‘orf/supplementary mapr
category. We first run delete.sh to delete all the annotations from the
‘others’ group and from ‘orf/supplementary’ (although none exist in
this group yet). Then we run annotate.sh and this adds annotations from
the bulk\_annotations file to the ‘other’ mapr group and the
‘orf/supplementary’ mapr group depending on what is in the new
bulkmap-config.yml file.

I create a separate PR for the two files prodXX\_input\_bulk.txt and
prodXX\_input.txt in idr-metadata/scripts/reannotate. Then this PR is
included in the merge build and the files will be included in the clone
on the server (omeroreadwrite etc).

> I usually test out the contents of prodXX\_input\_bulk.txt and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of prodXX\_input\_bulk.txt and prodXX\_input.txt  are usually tested out
```

> prodXX\_input.txt line by line in idr-testing so that they can be run as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
line by line in idr-testing so that they can be run as
```

session so that if your connection to the server is lost stdout output
from the import will not be lost. There are some useful hints about screen commands here below. The name of the screen should match the study name, as shown in example below:

    screen -S idr0093

Activate the virtual environment to be able to call ``omero`` commands from anywhere and to have a handy ``python`` environment to run scripts in.

    source /opt/omero/server/venv3/bin/activate

Define the OMERODIR (necessary for imports only).

    export OMERODIR=/opt/omero/server/OMERO.server

Log in to OMERO. The username for importing data on all 3 servers is ``demo``. Password is available in the OME credentials store (``pass``).

    omero login demo@localhost

To import Experiments:

    omero import --bulk idr0048-abdeladim-chroms/experimentA/idr0048-experimentA-bulk.yml --file /tmp/idr0048.log  --errs /tmp/idr0048.err

The whole output will go into the ``idr0048.err`` file (even when no errors are detected). Depending on your ``filePaths.tsv`` file, the import command will create the datasets with files inside them or a new Project with Datasets and Images in them. You might need to log in

> to the WebUI and move the datasets into the right project. See [Editing in the Web

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the WebUI and move the datasets into the right project. See [Editing in the Web UI](#editing-in-the-web-ui) for more information.
```

> UI](#editing-in-the-web-ui) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: The line break made the link to "Editing in web UI" not work. Hoping that removing the line break will fix that.

    cd path/to/idr-utils
    venv/bin/python scripts/releases.py  /opt/IDR/idr.openmicroscopy.org/_data/studies.tsv --release prodXX --release-date YYYY-MM-DD --db-size <size-in-GB-see-below>

The database size should be obtained by:

    export PGPASSWORD=$(/opt/omero/server/OMERO.server/bin/omero config get omero.db.pass)
    export PGHOST=$(/opt/omero/server/OMERO.server/bin/omero config get omero.db.host)
    psql -U omero idr -c "select pg_database_size('idr')"

Append the new rows from `studies.tsv` and `releases.tsv` to the two first tabs of the IDR dataset map spreadsheet,
    studies and releases.

## Publicize the study

When the publication is released we usually advertise the dataset on
twitter. Its good if
you can provide a link to the paper and an example image for the tweet.
There is a tweetdeck team for IDRnews, Josh can add your twitter account
to it then you'll be able to tweet for IDRnews (I haven’t done this).

### Get a DOI

A DOI is requested once the dataset has been pretty much finalized and
we know what the URL will be in production IDR (i.e. once it’s in
idr-next or idr).

An Excel spreadsheet is filled out with details about the study

> including. I usually fill out as much as I can and then send to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
including. The IDR Team members fill out as much as possible and then send to the
```

##### Notes about submissions

Notes that are made about submissions and other useful files sent by the
authors are copied to both the EBI and Dundee file systems. They used to
be kept in the same directory as the image data but since we are likely
to make these directories available for download of the image files I
have moved them to /nfs/bioimage/drop/PRIVATE/ and
/uod/idr/filesets/PRIVATE . There is one directory for each study.

In the EBI /nfs/bioimage/drop/ I have in some cases moved files from the
original submission directories into the PRIVATE/ directories as I don’t
think they would be useful for IDR users to download, and it might be
better if they don’t e.g. drafts of papers, initial metadata files.
(e.g. see /nfs/bioimage/drop/PRIVATE/idr0027).
I didn’t have time to do this for all the directories at Dundee so they
differ slightly in location of content from the ones at EBI.

Only emails that are not in the idr-submissions mailing list are
included in the PRIVATE directories. Some submissions were ongoing when
we got the mailing list and I’ve only saved by hand the emails that were
not cc’d to idr-submissions.

##### Excel gotchas and useful things

> I’m sure you guys will be doing something better than using Excel but if

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> anyone does use Excel here are some things to watch out for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some things to watch out for.
```

![](img/curation-workflow/image9.png)

(see

> https://github.com/IDR/idr0002-heriche-condensation/blob/master/screenA/idr0002-screenA-processed.txt)

Reviewer: This link works, but does not render as a link.

![Screen Shot 2020-11-03 at 10 13 25](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2478303/97972907-2a432500-1dbd-11eb-8f8d-2c30749a9086.png)

Definite improvement though, not a blocker imho

Author: Something's gone wrong.... Markdown is meant to auto-convert links

Author: Now fixed

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1644105/97982685-0fc47800-1dcc-11eb-96e7-ba848a5c7191.png)

Reviewer: Indeed, works fine on my machine too, thanks @manics
